this video is brought to you by
Squarespace in 1996 the musical theater
world was changed Forever by a small
Off-Broadway musical gaining the
attention of critics and fans alike rent
was promptly moved to a proper Broadway
Theater where it quickly spread
throughout the whole world and for those
of us who have recently become
immunologists from spending the last
three years in a pandemic we know just
how fast a plague can spread without
protection namely much like kova 19 a
lot of people who didn't think it was
bad to begin with yes I am comparing
redheads to anti-masters see
I love drint focus on the past tense the
movie adaptation came out at the perfect
time for me I was in high school and
just started to take my future seriously
my dad had just won a decades-long fight
for workers compensation after breaking
his neck and back on the job so he
received a settlement that in hindsight
was nothing compared to what he was
actually owed which meant I got a
digital video camera for Christmas I
could finally start making movies and
properly editing them I could work on my
art so when rent came out I heavily
identified
with Mark this was also at the peak of
Post 9 11 fears of a cataclysmic World
War III so that seemed to be a
possibility so the no day but today
messaging resonated with me quite deeply
when you have something you have to say
it's important to get it out into the
world now because there might not be a
tomorrow through rent however I was
exposed to a wider range of theater and
began to see places where rent themes
were more clearly expressed Hedwig in
the anger inch while problematic I would
argue knowingly but that's not a mole
hell I'm willing to die on seemed to
just hold itself together in a way where
rents use and catchy songs and general
sentimentality helped you to ignore its
shortcomings and then baby gay James
begins to learn more about the AIDS
crisis and specifically what it was like
in the early 90s and late 80s and
yeah there are some issues about that
and then as someone who grew up and grew
their career while still holding on to
my artistic dreams okay Mark it really
can't be that hard to get your
together and through discussions with my
co-writer Nick who had nothing but
contempt for every aspect of the
production despite only knowing about it
through second-hand knowledge I began to
concede that the bigger picture themes
you know it was made by straight guy
with the best of intentions whose
objective was to depict the
deteriorating state of artistic Merit
that he had seen through the 1980s rent
was made to push against the trend of
corporatization in giuliani's
gentrification of New York City as well
as a serenade for the bygone golden age
of Starving Artists through a
reimagining of blabo M in modern times
where we swap out consumption which was
likely tuberculosis for AIDS Larson
seeks to remind his audience of the
importance and value of authenticity in
art and in turn the value of art itself
to society but that opens up a whole
bunch of questions about Mark's role as
the protagonist a question about what
art is how the nonsensical elements of
the plot fit into a representation of
social justice the behavior and morals
of the core cast in the context of early
1990s New York the representation of
queer characters the moral focus on the
effects of AIDS on straight people and a
question of how appropriate it is to
swap out tuberculosis for AIDS without
too much adaptation AZT break and then I
eventually got Nick to sit down and
watch the thing he hates as much as I
disagree with hate watching on Merit but
he wanted to be armed with information
if he was going to keep this discussion
going and sure he's not having a great
time but
oh God it's like watching your favorite
childhood movie as an adult and you just
spend the whole time cringing because
instead of just knowing how the songs
vaguely fit into the context of play
seeing the actual interactions between
these people who are somehow framed
heroically and their sense of what the
world apparently owes them
there's a lot to be desired for instance
Mark is offered a part-time job in his
field that pays well above a living wage
especially for the time and then he
quits because it's taking time away from
his own art take the other 20 hours a
week and make your dumb pretentious
documentary about your friend's Mark
your documentary isn't even about
anything you're not making it to be
consumed by an audience outside your
group of friends you're not even
recording sound this art documentary
offers nothing to humanity it has no
value to culture because there is this
implicit belief in the late 80s that
making art for a mass audience somehow
diminishes its inherent authenticity
there's no reason you want to make it
except to stroke your own ego and call
yourself an artist in spite of the fact
that you're allergic to criticism and
therefore are too afraid to actually
show it to anyone else no wonder Maureen
dumped you okay so in spite of the fact
that rent is deeply problematic in a way
that's easy to overlook because the
collection of identities are visibly
represented regardless of that it's
important as a work of theater because
it presented specifically queer
identities to a broad audience and
helped ease the general population into
appreciating these people where they
were depicted without rent swinging open
the doors we would not have had the kind
of representation we have now rent while
Troublesome paved the way for True
masterpieces of queer representation
namely Tony kushner's Angels In America
which while lacking an explicit
discussion of art itself it discusses
Ren's themes of inequality poverty
republicanism AIDS and cultural
disassociation in a much more subtle yet
targeted way this strangely comedic
Fantasia about death and rebirth the gay
state of being in late 80s America and a
culture on the precipice of great
Capital C change remains one of the most
celebrated pieces of theater in the
American Canon and for Angels in America
to fly I had argued rent needed to walk
hobble limp saunter and then you
actually have the moment of douge where
you need to fact check yourself and rent
properly premiered Off-Broadway in 1996
after being workshopped since 1993.
workshopping is when you put the
production in front of test audiences
and work out the Kinks before you put it
in front of the real audience part one
of Angels in America Millennium
approaches however
premiered in 1991
and part two parastroika premiered in
1992 and they were on Broadway by 93.
rent wasn't even out of the gate by the
time angels in America lapped it all
these years I thought rent was a
progenitor of queerness in theater and
meanwhile there went to gaiju making one
of the most significant additions to
Modern literary canon while being passed
off as riding on rent's coattails what
do I do with this how do I reconcile
that if angels in America didn't need
rent to prop itself up then why rent at
all
and why rent when you can buy a
subscription to Squarespace this video
is brought to you by Squarespace
building a site with Squarespace is a
great way to build your brand and reach
a wider audience whether you're a visual
artist photographer writer a video
producer or work in any other creative
field it's vital to have a site that you
can use to help build your brand on your
own terms Nick and I have had a presence
on social media for a while now and
obviously this channel but with certain
sites looking like they're going to go
the way of the dodo we thought it about
time to make our presence felt away from
the Bird app using squarespace's
incredibly intuitive and easy to use
tools we've built the James Summerton
YouTube Channel website featuring a Blog
where Nick and I write about topics that
probably wouldn't make for a full video
like the movie The Menu the show
succession and my rediscovery of anime
as well as a special section where you
can read preview chapters of my upcoming
novel and check out Nick's full first
novel gentlemen's club and best of all
by using squarespace's video hosting
feature we're even able to give you
access to videos that YouTube made us
remove
you can head to squarespace.com right
now for a free trial and when you're
ready to launch your site go to
squarespace.com James S that's
j-a-m-e-s-s to save 10 off your first
purchase of a website or domain start
showing the world how amazing you are
today with Squarespace
foreign
[Music]
[Applause]
I know some of you don't like it when we
synopsisize the media under discussion
because spoilers but this is a
comparative analysis that takes into
consideration political economic and
social context so it's probably best
that I make my case clear when it comes
to what we're actually talking about but
specifically what is it about these
Productions that make it significant
that angels in America came first it's
important to show respect to
Trailblazers in representation even if
their representation doesn't age well
media that Stakes out new territory can
swing the door open for better
representation and that's how I felt
rent's major purpose fit into our modern
media landscape messy but ultimately
palatable enough to large audiences to
broaden the spectrum of acceptance
enough to permit something like angels
in America to get into the world but
that clearly wasn't the case however
there are two claims here that I'm going
to need to back up with some textual
evidence one is that rent is
so-so on representation the other is
that rent is fundamentally palatable as
in it takes radical identities of the
day and age queer people homeless people
and addicts and softens their
personalities and circumstances so that
it's easier for General audiences to
identify with them I see this as finding
a way to fit these people into the
societal Norm rather than challenging
the boundaries of the norm lean in
empathy and especially when it comes to
that I am liable to contradict myself
because rent is messy and a huge
component of why it's messy is the way
in which the audience interprets it and
the way these characters are framed
through Direction so what happens in
rent the plot of rent takes place over
the course of a single year 525 600
minutes to be exact and focuses on a
group of young
artists who are coping with the effects
of poverty addiction and HIV and AIDS
the story focuses on their hardships
their hopes and the relationships that
they build as they work through the
obstacles that life throws at them the
central characters are Mark Cohen an
aspiring filmmaker the show's narrator
and unwittingly the worst person on
Earth and Roger Davis a songwriter and
recovering addict the show begins on
Christmas Eve when the protagonists are
confronted with the possibility that
their landlord and former roommate Benny
May remove them from their apartment
since they haven't paid rent in a year
they triumphantly announce that they are
not going to pay rent because they're
all just so artistic and therefore they
shouldn't have to pay rent because
getting jobs will interfere with their
creative process Benny had once been
part of the group of starving artist
friends and is alluded to have once had
strong leftist political beliefs he has
since married into money and opted to
purchase this building and the
neighboring property with the intent of
developing these Lots while he doesn't
have plans to develop the literal slum
that Mark and Roger live in he does want
to evict a homeless Camp to construct a
cyber Art Studio vocally expressing that
the goal is to offer unspecialized
employment to be fair while Benny had
once agreed to let Mark and Roger live
there rent free this is something he has
changed his mind on God forbid you have
to pay rent Roger who is haunted by the
suicide of his girlfriend struggles to
find inspiration for his music until he
meets Mimi who instigates a very poorly
judged romance with him for a number of
reasons Roger is very resistant to her
flirtations namely because he's an
addict in recovery and basically every
addiction program mandates a solid year
of no new romantic attachments after
becoming sober meanwhile Mimi literally
sings a song about how it's okay to do
drugs in Roger's face and yet this is
the Romantic Duo the audience is meant
to be rooting for evidenced by the fact
that this romantic through line is the
closest thing to a plot that the play
has will they won't they I digress
attending the squatters Christmas party
is Tom Collins a good-natured professor
of philosophy in the digital age he is
assaulted for unknown reasons on his way
to Mark and Rogers and encounters Angel
who helps him get back up to his feet
sparking the start of their romance
Angel is surely one of the only likable
characters in the play which says
something given that the first thing
that they do in the play is kill a dog
Benny's dog the two show up to the party
as a couple and remain that way until
angel passes away in a pivotal moment in
the second act with much anticipation we
meet Mark's ex-girlfriend Maureen
Johnson who is an eccentric and
self-obsessed performance artist as well
as her new girlfriend Joanne Jefferson
who is a no-nonsense lawyer Joanne is
clearly a bit of a masochist too or else
she would have left Maureen within five
minutes of meeting her Maureen is also
bisexual which means that she's a
apparently because bisexuals apparently
have too many options and so they can
never be trusted to keep it in their
pants
apparently of the aforementioned
characters four are HIV positive Roger
Mimi Angel and Collins throughout the
musical these characters also face the
harsh realities of poverty illness and
loss they confront the stigma and
challenges of poverty while cherishing
their friendships until they all decide
to hate each other when Angel dies and
Roger and Mimi break up and Mark quits a
ridiculously high paying job because it
isn't his art
and he doesn't have time to wait context
Mark is one of the people not living
with HIV or Aids or addiction so he has
absolutely zero swords owned by Damocles
hanging over his head but he is a
straight white man so he deserves things
in the show's conclusion everyone
reconciles the differences because Mimi
almost dies from a combination of drug
overdose weather exposure in December
and what is alluded to be Advanced stage
AIDS but Roger sings the worst song to
her and she comes back to life and then
they watch the documentary that Mark's
been making over the last year about his
friends a documentary which he has
recorded with no sound equipment so it's
basically just a slideshow highlight
reel of the show which we've just
watched kind of like what I just made
you go through but without the pithy
commentary but that said I feel a little
bad being so critical of rent primarily
because it isn't all bad rent hit the
pavement running at a time when having
any kind of queerness was something that
according to censors opt to have been
kept out of media Brent was bold about
topics around sex and sexuality and
featured Collins a character with AIDS
holding on to dreams about his future
however the problem I have here is not
so much with rent itself but a question
of why it's still put on this pedestal
by many with angels in America while
Angels In America which checks those
same boxes is
not nearly as widely known
especially when I would hold angels in
America in much higher esteem
[Music]
Tony kushner's Play Angels in America
was a game changer when it premiered in
San Francisco in 1991. the play takes
place in New York City during the
mid-1980s during the height of the AIDS
epidemic The Seven Hour production is
broken up into two sections which are
titled Millennium approaches and
perestroika Millennium approaches
establishes the characters and how their
lives are intertwined as well as sets up
the magic realism that props up the
allegorical side of what the AIDS crisis
was doing to America we are introduced
to Pryor Walter a gay man of lineage
that can be traced back all the way to
the crossing of the Mayflower and Beyond
story opens he Reveals His AIDS
diagnosis while he's handling it well
especially given what life with AIDS
meant in the late 1980s his boyfriend
Louis ironson struggles with the fear
and responsibility of having to care for
a sick partner the play also introduces
us to Joe Pitt a closeted Mormon lawyer
who is being groomed by Roy Cohn to be a
pawn in a game of political chess Joe's
wife is Harper who is dealing with
severe mental illness and is being
severely gas lit by Joe she has begun to
suspect that in light of her husband's
complete lack of sexual interest in her
he is in fact a homosexual we see the
impact that aids has had on society
throughout the course of Millennium
approaches as well as the fear and shame
that surround the epidemic and the
political inaction regarding the crisis
the characters are forced to come to
terms with their own mortality as well
as the unpredictability of the future
unable to withstand the pressure of
being directly confronted with the
reality of AIDS Lewis leaves prior while
he is unconscious in the hospital
something that prior doesn't really let
him live down the play isn't wrong in
having prior state that Lewis is leaving
is a bitter pill to swallow partners of
AIDS victims usually stuck it out until
the very end something that the rest of
the world should have seen as a
testament to the loyalty and compassion
that we queer people were accused of not
possessing in the absence of Lewis
prior's old drag friend and nurse
believes steps in to pick up the slack
he is aside from one of the takeaway
characters of the show pivotal in
challenging the play's principal villain
Roy Cohn Belize is assigned to attend to
Roy as he dies of AIDS which is being
exasperated by the cancer treatment he
insists on taking to protect his
reputation as a passing for straight
Republican shark lawyer all the while he
loses his mind and is haunted by the
literal ghosts of his morally bankrupt
past as Roy tries to convince his
Protege Joe to relocate to Washington
the Mormon struggles with his wife
Harper The Strain on this relationship
is spurring him to dive deeper and
deeper into his repressed homosexual
urges this leads him to cross paths with
Lewis a word processor for Soulless
lawyers like himself Joe Falls
completely in love with Lewis who is on
the rebound and who also has no idea
that Joe Works directly under the living
embodiment of gay evil Harper is taken
in by Joe's mother Hannah an eluded
closeted lesbian who crosses paths with
prior by then Pryor has already started
seeing slash hallucinating visitations
from Angels bestowing messages for him
to prophesy unto mankind amidst a full
psychological meltdown he turns to
whomever he's able to to give him
answers he finds those answers at the
Mormon Community Center where Hannah is
volunteering this strange Duo ends up
becoming a curious pair Hannah is
implied to also have interactions with
angels truly questioning if Pryor is
actually seeing Angels or not because
Belize is a nurse in the AIDS Ward where
Roy Cohn is receiving AZT an
experimental new AIDS drug still in
double-blind trials and therefore nearly
impossible to attain he sees Joe through
prior word gets back to Lewis who
confronts Joe who we learned was cohn's
right-hand man for some truly abominable
legal actions love the one where you
found against those women on Staten
Island who were suing the New Jersey
Factory the toothpaste makers whose
orange colored smoke was blinding
children blind just minor irritation
three of them had to be hospitalized Joe
I mean it's sort of brilliant in a
satanic sort of way how you conclude
that these women have no right to sue
under the air and water protection act
because the air and water protection act
doesn't protect people but actually only
air and water Joe who had been waffling
on a decision to leave his clearly
mentally ill wife to the Wolves for the
sake of a penis has his mind made up for
him when Lewis dumps him we don't
actually find out what happens to Joe
doesn't matter Harper leaves to travel
the world on Joe's Credit Card prior
blessed by angels has his aides go into
a kind of remission something about AIDS
that happens sometimes in baffles
researchers to this day he forgives
Lewis but refuses to take him back and
then they and Belize become good friends
with Hannah who remains in New York oh
right and Roy Cohn has a gruesome
on-stage death the the more you know
about him the more you get this kind of
schadenfreude about it in addition to
these personal challenges the play
delves into the political and social
issues that were prevalent During the
period and
sadly still to this day the dishonesty
and Corruption that were widespread
throughout the Reagan Administration are
exemplified by Roy Cohn the only major
character in the play directly based on
a real person the play is critical of
the lack of sympathy within conservative
administrations for people whose lives
have been touched by AIDS and it
underscores the struggle of the queer
Community for visibility and equality at
the same time it balances the
internalizing factors of living with
AIDS and what that does to someone
living in a society whose only discourse
about people living with AIDS is that
they are
the disease deep inside you there's a
part of you the most inner part
entirely free of
the story hurdles toward an apocalyptic
conclusion the paths of the characters
connect and divide bringing them face to
face with their darkest fears their most
heartfelt desires and the unavoidable
fact that things will always be changing
the play investigates the human capacity
for growth and evolution as well as the
intricate dynamics of relationships in
the search for Connection in a world
that feels more chaotic
with each passing day
[Music]
initially a comparison between rent and
angels in America is weird they are at
first comparable because they're
acclaimed theatrical Productions that
are about or feature queer characters
and AIDS in an approximately late 80s
setting however the play's direct
subject matter seems quite different
rent wants to directly discuss
gentrification and the effect that has
on artists and therefore art how the
heartless elements of greed is killing
the concept of Art For Art's Sake it's
about the heart of New York City and who
this Heart Belongs to about Scrappy kids
sticking it to the Man by moooing at him
angels in America by contrast is about
three people's cumulative nervous
breakdown around the question of AIDS
homosexuality and what it means to exist
in this modern world however dig a
Little Deeper still and at the core of
these plays what these plays are
actually meant to say to the audience is
a discussion about change and they're
using AIDS queerness art and the moral
value of America to frame that
discussion where rently away from
actually holding a discourse about AIDS
it focuses on Art and Where Angels in
America laser focuses on the subject of
AIDS in a Darkly comedic way it's
discourse on the condition of art is
more
implicit male love isn't ever ambivalent
a comparison drawn between them derives
from their joint central question what
the crap is going on with the USA
famously both of these plays use queer
people to help explore this question and
make use of one of the deadliest
pandemics in human history as part of
the setting however a study of rent
finds that it has shockingly little to
do with AIDS and actively avoids a
discussion about it even when prompted
AZT break and while it contains visible
queer characters there's no real
discussion about queerness itself one
could even argue the queer characters
are inconsequential to the plot with one
exception we'll swing around to later of
the WLW crew Joanne is only really there
as an attache to Marine who again only
seems like she has a lot to do because
she's an interesting character there
will always be women in rubber flirting
with me and it's a shame because Joanne
is one of the few if not only purely
sympathetic characters for whom the
audience is meant to empathize with on
account of her circumstances and actions
Maureen's involvement revolves around
her more or less deliberately starting a
rye yes granted this is a matter of
homeless people resisting their eviction
from a tent city I don't think they
particularly needed the push from a
trust fund baby's bad performance art
who implores them to Moo Moo with me
Collins doesn't really have a whole lot
to do aside from complaining about
having to live in New York City again
it's not really a bad thing to have a
man living with AIDS who is still
dreaming about his future in fact that's
probably a noble and nuanced thing to
depict at the time and yes I realized
that in Productions where Angel a street
performer and Collins's love interest is
depicted as trans that would not
necessarily imply that Collins is gay or
bisexual but it leads to the question
does a queer person in a romance
automatically facilitate queerness it's
also worth noting that angel and Collins
are the only functional couple in the
entire Story Angel is the only one of
the four queer characters who has an
impact on the plot though it's a bit of
a barrier gaze moment Angel's death is
one of the final straws for the other
seven friends to largely break ties and
the memory of Angel is the Catalyst for
their lukewarm reconnection in the end
and granted I can see this as being a
nice break from the drag of anti-gay
propaganda and this would be super
fantastic for the time if it wasn't for
the actual plot of rent as per labo M to
be built entirely around a straight
romance really you can cut the gay
characters out of it with the exception
of Angel's death the play's primary
conflict revolves around Benny and Mark
Roger and Mimi angels in America by
contrast features a predominantly queer
cast the only character who isn't queer
or alluded to be queer is Harper who's a
queen in her own right my church we
don't believe in homosexuals in my
church we don't believe in Mormons
what's your Steve
okay
I get it there is however an argument to
be made about angels in America lacking
queer identities outside of five gay men
and a closeted lesbian and I feel like
that's a valid criticism though if
Kushner wanted to stick to writing about
his own lived experiences as a gay man
in the 1980s I can appreciate that
angels in America Dives in to display
the intricate nuances of Gay Culture at
the time and covers a lot of Territory
between four Gay characters Plus
Roy Cohn without an overt discussion
Kushner depicts the ways homophobic
oppression and internalization have
shaped them it's worth noting that none
of these characters ever come out and
tell audiences how homophobia has
affected them but it's apparent that
each of them have some neurotic Behavior
as a result I'm sorry I didn't introduce
you I always get so closety of these
family things but you get Butts hey
cousin Doris uh you don't remember me
I'm Lou a racial's boy Lou not Lewis
because if you say Lewis looking at the
civil and S I don't have a civil let us
blame you hiding this collection of
little things can amount to just as much
of the queer experience as the more
Sinister visible elements of homophobia
and in the case of Roy and Joe we see
the destructive side of living a
closeted life Joe seems to be out to
destroy Harper and use her to live the
Mormon dream while Roy acts as a grim
prediction of what he will become
however as mentioned the range of queer
experiences seems to be broader in rent
of course depending upon if Angel is a
gay drag queen non-binary or trans but
even with the illusion of lesbian drama
rent is already a wider depiction of the
queer experience it comes down to
whether you would prefer a wider yet
shallow range of topics or a more
isolated topic but with much deeper
exploration I have my preferences
towards angels in America however for
this alone I can't fault anyone for
leaning towards the broader topics
however when it comes to how these queer
characters are depicted in their
struggle with AIDS
rent
comes up short
the grand irony of rent is that its
executive point isn't about AIDS even
though its reference as the AIDS play in
various parodies there is a mention of
AIDS in it but there's very little in
here about the reality of HIV and AIDS
in the musical Rent is a play based on
the signature Opera by Giacomo Puccini
La bohem the major adaptation here aside
from setting and language is
substituting consumption for AIDS
consumption was a catch-all diagnosis
which meant we have no idea what's wrong
with this dying person but they're
losing weight however it was most often
used to describe symptoms of
tuberculosis the problem with swapping
out TB for AIDS is that there was a vast
cultural separation in terms of how the
public observed these conditions largely
arising from how HIV is transmitted and
what that said about the kind of people
such an individual must have associated
with to contract it rent doesn't
particularly handle this like at all
half of the HIV positive cast or
straight and there's additionally very
little depiction of public stigma
against them it's the fact that aids was
a massive cultural shift that quite
frankly our 40 years later culture is
still recovering from while HIV today is
not a death sentence and provided the
use of medication it can be nearly
impossible to transmit this was
something that shifted our entire
culture in a very sudden jarring way
there was a widespread political and
social climate of simply not
acknowledging AIDS at the same time of
it being a kind of Boogeyman AIDS was
this nightmarish real world serial
killing babadook the less it was openly
acknowledged as a problem the worse it
got and it was not discussed and it got
bad it wasn't until 1987 that President
Reagan even openly acknowledged the
existence of AIDS in America AIDS did
not need to be discussed because AIDS
did not exist in the puritanical moral
majority of America AIDS was something
that was contracted by homosexuals as
long as it kept to those people it was
seen as something that properly
monogamous heterosexual people did not
need to worry about and when straight
people did contract it it was was
individuals who were promiscuous or
those who were using intravenous drugs
the Moral Majority had a bible-based
case to say that these people had AIDS
as a kind of poetic consequence to their
sinful lives at least that's a moral
argument for those who don't seem to
know anything about Jesus convincing men
to leave their wives for him supporting
sex workers and Healing The Sick without
compensation or Consequences and even
after the straight straight world of
commercial medicine and academic ego
pulled up their big boy pants and
realized that hiv-positive gay guinea
pigs were you know human beings that
were dying horrible deaths
AIDS went largely undiscussed on a
social level we might look back and say
all Madonna did was say that you should
be nice to gay people in the 80s but
this was still a period of time where
there was such a fear around every gay
man carrying AIDs that even at the
height of worldwide Fame just saying
that put her career at risk so if there
is anything about rent's depiction of
AIDS to be credited it is the
willingness to discuss it so openly and
feature it as a major component of the
story however this representation is
naturally going to be limited based on
the plot beats of lava m labo m is about
a bunch of Plucky Young Artists living
in paris's low rent artistic District at
a period of time when Bohemian aesthetic
and lifestyle was in Vogue this is the
same setting for instance as Moulin
Rouge the major problem with Faithfully
adapting a story about poverty and
tuberculosis to become a story about
poverty and AIDS is that the story is
still about tuberculosis but by the name
of AIDS which means in order to keep the
same pacing of the original story it
means the reality of AIDS needs to be
secondary to what needs to happen to
keep La bohem's plot beats a large
component of lava m is the Romantic
tension between Rodolfo and Mimi the
characters Roger and Mimi are based on
this is also what makes lavoam a tragedy
because bohemimi dies for realsies
whereas rent Mimi gets resurrected with
the power of the world's most discount
rhyming dictionary however because Roger
and Mimi are both carrying a deadly
infection that's something that can't
really fall to the Wayside but we need
to get this plot moving and that whole
dying horrible death thing could get in
the way so it needs to be addressed in a
way that reminds the audience that aids
is real without interfering with the
actual plot of a drug addict trying to
use AIDS support rhetoric to Badger her
love interest into scoring drugs for her
so how do we address the AIDS elephant
in the room AZT break all right good
enough
I guess there are like seven different
flavors of why this line hasn't aged
well to the point of maybe like maybe it
shouldn't have been written in the first
place Roger and Mimi are engaging in a
discussion about their relationship at
which point they are interrupted by a
pager reminding them that it's time to
take their scheduled AZT
the common name used for acetamine AZT
was the first significant AIDS
medication which effectively extended
the lifespan of an AIDS patient by a few
years if not months it was one of those
treatments is almost worse than the
disease kind of drugs you have the FDA
giving you a drug so far you've got AZT
why which I can't take because it's too
far too toxic because over half the
people that have HIV okay but the F when
AIDS became every medical researcher's
white whale as in to get the credit for
being the person College a
pharmaceutical company who discovered it
there was a very sudden push to develop
some kind of treatment for it and while
gay men trans people sex workers addicts
and even people who would receive blood
transfusions were dying like gnats in a
cold snap the FDA was dragging the drug
through its regular scientific method of
double-blind Trials it took several
protests a very loud gay man named Larry
Kramer and one Doctor Who became famous
again during covid to force the FDA to
push the drug into public availability
and when it did get approved for public
use it cost a small fortune due to
availability was nearly impossible to
get an extended history of AIDS is
fascinating and depressing and I would
implore viewers of this video to dive
into it if you've got the right mindset
because it's very deep and a perfect
example of why we can't trust
corporations maybe I'll make a video
about it but what does all of that mean
when it comes to rent
AZT break all right first of all the
degree of flippancy in that line
undermines the impact of a
life-extending treatment for millions of
suffering people the framing of this
delivery is even worse interrupting
their romantic development AZT is meant
as a signifier that aids is keeping them
apart the knowledge of their own looming
mortality is generating a rift however
that's a problem because Mimi wants to
fill that Rift with drugs and Hedonism
and is trying to convince Roger to do
the same thing Mimi hijack's rhetoric
evade support groups like no day but
today and uses it as an excuse to engage
with her addictions whereas the intended
meaning of this is more in line with
Collins's objective if you want to move
to Santa Fe to open a restaurant there's
no point in putting it off so Mimi's
objective is more or less to use AIDS as
a common ground with Roger to bring him
closer to her because misery loves
company so with her intentions of
leveraging AIDS as common ground AZT
time really does function as this
life-saving cure being an obstruction to
what the audience wants
romantic tension deep cut
maybe but for a musical play which won
the Pulitzer Prize for drama I think
it's absolutely within reason to hold it
up to higher standards of consistent
literary language however this is a
literary angle that most audiences won't
engage with on a conscious level
especially because AZT has been replaced
with a much more accessible Truvada
which is still expensive but thanks to
government assistance programs within
the price range of understanding how two
jobless squatting drug addicts would be
able to afford it at which point the
question would become how to jobless
squatting drug addicts in the late 80s
could afford pagers which were very
expensive at the time and then also for
Gen Z
what's a pager is Larson presenting a
normative description of the world that
we should make AIDS drugs more
accessible so that we can allow these
epic romances to flourish but why
present a fantasy here while errantly
trying to establish a gritty reality in
other places
the language of poverty here isn't
consistent and quite frankly
it's insulting to poor people and this
is what I mean when I say that rent is
limited in its ability to portray AIDS
as per how much it needs to follow the
plot of lava M which is already
problematic because of the four HIV
positive characters in rent only one has
consumption in Lobo M so the closer you
need to follow the plot of La Boheme the
less you can actually present the
reality of AIDS in real life it's also
worth noting that in the four act Opera
Mimi only contracts tuberculosis in the
third act so the plot of labo M being
adapted to replace consumption with AIDS
is not going to be able to properly
frame any discussion about disease or
plague until the halfway point it's also
worth noting that neither Collins nor
angels French Bohemian counterparts have
tuberculosis and that angel survives to
the very end also worth noting that
Collins Angel Maureen Joanne and Benny's
respective characters basically have no
role in the second half of labo M which
explains why rent's second act has no
real structure except for lesbian drama
I see an additional angle of
problematicness here because the second
most significant deviation from The
Source material is to change not only
the ethnicity but the gender and or
sexuality of Angel to give them a highly
stigmatized sexually transmitted
infection and then after sorting them
into multiple vulnerable and
underrepresented identities
to kill them this is second of course to
the most egregious deviation from La
Boheme as mentioned the resurrection of
Mimi which in spite of Angel's death
completely shifts the tone of this
musical from having any kind of
moralizing theme don't worry about poor
people they've got magical Resurrection
music they're fine meanwhile Angel's
over there like where's my song
funny that the straight HIV sufferer
gets the Magical song but the queer one
who didn't even die in La Boheme has to
stay dead even though Angel's romance
with Collins was right there Collins
doesn't get a resurrected love interest
either funny how that works leads me to
feel like the straight versus gay AIDS
politics reads a little bit shallow
Cullen's AIDS more or less has no effect
on the plot until Angel's death and is
brushed over whenever it comes up
meanwhile AIDS swings over Roger and
nimi like an Edgar Allan Poe Horror
Story just always there foreshadowing
tragedy like dramatic irony that being
with the exception of Angel who doesn't
seem to have AIDS until they do
following a very strange musical number
equating the drama of the friend group
to an orgy and Angel emerges saying it's
over and then peacefully wordlessly
walks off the stage bathes in Golden
Light adorned in wing-like Linens and on
one hand this is offering visual Justice
to queer victims of AIDS for whom even
left-leaning politicians at the time
decried them as more or less getting
what was coming to them again the
framing devices and the larger contexts
are not flattering especially for a
Pulitzer prize-winning play Angel was a
spry and Lively character for whom
sympathy wasn't really something
projected to the audience where we see
silently Angel's time in an AIDS hospice
during a musical number that they're not
even involved in this is our only window
in the entire production that depicts
the reality of AIDS for many people
especially because Angel goes from this
to having an orgy that's likely meant to
be both allegorical and literal knowing
that they have late stage AIDS it's not
framing Angel as a sympathetic character
an honorable depiction would be clearly
displaying Angel as not being in a
situation where they may spread a deadly
infection especially because many in
America specifically use the language of
lechery and perversion to describe a
group of people they felt knowingly or
maliciously spread the disease putting
angel in that category is not something
I think is a flattering use of a queer
character and if you want to go deep and
literary and I think this says more
about the kind of people who were voting
for The pulitzers at the time Angel's
death can even be read as Poetic Justice
where Mimi's death is met with an
onstage Bluster of concern and grief
Angel goes straight from an orgy to
their funeral at peace for the first
time in the play their friends remark
about their joy-filled memories of Angel
we don't see Angel's death nor do we see
how anyone but Collins was trying to do
anything to help Mimi the straight one
was framed as a tragedy because that's
how it was framed in Lobo M this is a
young girl with a loving mother who will
break the hearts of everyone who she
knows and she has the rest of her life
to live Angel's death contrarily was
framed tragically yes but as an
inevitability
as a natural consequence keeping in mind
that Angel's love om counterpart did not
die there's a significant case to say
that the plot could have progressed as
it did regardless if Angel died or not
depending on the direction there is even
language here to suggest that angel is
better off dead that they're more at
peace dead than they were alive death is
a mercy for what they were experiencing
not two scenes earlier especially sour
is that angel in earlier Productions is
depicted exclusively in drag while
they're alive and then when they are
dead we see them out of drag for the
first time
and this is how we are left to believe
they are most at peace with their
queerness removed I would never say
Larson was communicating this on purpose
however it's certainly a possible
reading and when you don't have to dig
very deep to read into gonna bring up
the fact again that this one the
Pulitzer Prize for drama which means
that I feel we have the literary license
to be able to extrapolate such readings
like this the award is held in high
esteem and indicates that the author was
thinking deeply about all the signifiers
and symbols of what they were writing
but then again most of the audience for
rent and likely most of the Pulitzer
voters were straight people they cheered
at the resurrection of the straight
character and the death of the queer
character was depicted to make them feel
sad it's not a good feeling to think of
myself as being here to elicit sympathy
out of an audience that's my role in
media it's just to live tragically rent
has this very dark likely unintended
Shadow looming over it where it reflects
the real world but in this cynical meta
textual way AIDS research did not really
exist until straight people began dying
from it the audience does not need a
resurrection for Angel because their
role not only as a character but as a
human being is Expendable alive or dead
is just as good
but for Mimi there is a want to see her
alive why should Mimi survive without
angel because the reality was that a
titanically larger number of queer
people died compared to straight people
because whenever queer people were in
the news it was as an AIDS victim or a
murder victim
the audience had been desensitized to
queer suffering for Generations even if
you didn't feel that queer people
deserved to die it was certainly
expected when we did but it was Mimi For
Whom the laws of nature were bent and
was brought back to life in a stark
standout moment of magic realism for
which the enduring two hours of
production sought to present a grim
gritty and sorrowful reality of American
destitution it was the pretty young CIS
Girl Who Loved a pretty young straight
boy who deserved Magic
because in a cynical way it is framed
that a normal girl did not deserve to
die of AIDS
in a way that was foreseeable for Angel
however
when a queer Creator makes media about
the queer experience
it seems we're the ones who get the
magic instead
[Music]
in angels in America
there are no punches pulled when it
comes to AIDS multiple characters have
close friends who have died of the
disease and two characters the
protagonist prior and the antagonist Roy
Cohn are currently living with it one of
the most striking aspects of prior's
portrayal is his physical deterioration
which serves as a brutal manifestation
of the effects of AIDS The Story begins
with Pryor at a funeral forcing him to
face the Specter of death from the very
first scene and Kushner uses vivid
descriptions of Pryor's declining Health
to highlight the brutal toll the disease
takes on the body well it's not going
well really
two new lesions
my leg hurts
there's protein in my urine the doctor
says but
who knows what the that portends
anyway it shouldn't be there the protein
my butt is chapped from diarrhea and
yesterday I shot blood prior's weakened
immune system leaves him susceptible to
opportunistic infections causing weight
loss capacity sarcoma lesions and a
great deterioration of his physical
appearance he's in and out of the
hospital each time more convinced that
he'll never get to leave and he hates
hospitals the first visit is preceded by
a harrowing scene in which his whole
body is in pain due to a mounting fever
he cries out for Lewis who finds him
just moments before Pryor has an
accident that covers him in feces and
blood
and then the fever mounts and he faints
his transformation from a vibrant young
man to a skeletal figure serves as a
potent visual representation of the
brutality of AIDS however Pryor's
experiences with illness are often
depicted through Vivid and painful
metaphors his description of the lesions
as Angels touch is particularly poignant
as it reveals the paradoxical nature of
suffering the Divine and destructive
intertwined and then the arrival of an
Angel representing the collective fears
and anxieties surrounding the disease
exasperates prior psychological mess his
battle with depression and fear of
Abandonment highlight the immense
psychological burden imposed by AIDS its
prior's fear of Abandonment that forms
the Crux of the Supernatural story
within angels in America when he's
abandoned by his lover Lewis after the
diagnosis is when the visitations from
the angel begins declaring prior a
prophet in the end we discover that Not
only was Prior abandoned but all of
humanity was abandoned when God left
heaven in the early days of the 20th
century leading to the biggest Wars in
human history and now to AIDS but
despite the brutal portrayal of AIDS
Kushner offers glimmers of Triumph and
resilience through Pryor's character
Pryor's refusal to be silenced or
diminished by the disease embodies a
spirit of resilience and Defiance his
determination to fight for his voice
agency and love despite overwhelming
odds serves as a testament to the human
spirit and acts as a stand-in for the
countless people at the time fighting
tooth and nail to be taken seriously by
the government and doctors of the world
through prior Kushner presents a vision
of Hope in the face of adversity but not
all characters have such a sunny ending
Roy Cohn a prominent lawyer and
political figure and Donald Trump's
Mentor FYI acts as a cautionary symbol
of opting for power in lieu of
internalized homophobia and embodies a
larger societal denial of the epidemic
despite being diagnosed with AIDS Roy
adamantly refuses to accept his
condition instead forcing his doctor to
treat him for liver cancer
because regardless if he has AIDS or not
if the public learns that he has AIDS
only then will he become a homosexual
and Roy Cohn in spite of having a
pension for pretty blonde boys has
nothing but contempt for homosexuals and
makes it abundantly clear why he does
not want people to think of him as one
yay lesbian you think these are names
that tell you who someone sleeps with
but they don't tell you that like all
labels they tell you one thing and one
thing only
when is an individual so identified fit
in the food chain in the pecking order
not ideology of sexual taste but
something much simpler clout not Hawaii
so who's me but who will pick up the
phone when I call who owes me favors
this is what a label refers to
now to someone who does not understand
this homosexual is what I am because I
have sex with men but really
this is wrong
homosexuals are not men who sleep with
other men
homosexual is a man who in 15 years of
trying
cannot pass a piss hands
anti-discrimination Bill through city
council homosexuals are men who know
nobody and who nobody knows who have
zero club Roy's denial reflects the
stigma associated with AIDS at the time
as he fears the impact of the disease
will have on his career and Public Image
his desire to maintain power and control
blinds him to the reality of his own
mortality and the pain endured by others
suffering from the disease Kushner
portrays the physical and emotional
struggles endured by Roy as the disease
progresses most prominently in the
body-wide cramps that overtake him later
on in the play the feverish
hallucinations of Ethel Rosenberg that
haunt him and the fast physical
deterioration from an aggressive lawyer
Manning his multi-line phone to the
barely conscious wraith wandering the
halls of the AIDS Wing where he'll die
and as his health declines Roy is
confronted with his own real mortality
when the New York Bar Association votes
to dispar him Roy didn't fear death
until his legacy was taken from him he's
even faced with the fact that treatment
for this disease is more wrapped up in
politics and doctoral showboating than
actually helping people watch out for
the double blind
they don't want you to sign something
that says they didn't give you m M's
instead of the real drug you'll die but
they'll get the kind of Statistics they
can publish in the New England Journal
of Medicine and you can't sue them
because you signed and if you don't sign
no pills so if you have any strings left
pull them because everyone is put
through the double blind but this times
against you you can't around with
placebos but his Connections in
Washington and New York who help him
skip the line and get a fridge full of
AZT all to himself when maybe 30 people
in the whole country had access to the
drug means nothing his big house in
Manhattan his deal making and power
brokering even his connections with
Reagan himself
couldn't save him from the same disease
that was killing people he described as
nobodies there is no romance in the
portrayal of AIDS in angels in America
it's pain it's blood its fevers
hallucinations diarrhea spasms swollen
glands opportunistic skin cancers not
only did it kill people in droves but
these were horrific deaths mortifying
nurses and the loved ones of victims and
Through The Gallows and hellish
conditions of a body destroying itself
we looked for some kind of meaning to it
all
why is it all happening we were
searching for purpose and a reason to go
on staring down a microscopic sadist
which knew no borders boundaries nor
Justice it targeted evil men like Roy
Cohn and good men like prior Walter
without discrimination
in the end Roy is dead and his dragon's
horde of AZT is swipe to be given to
people who need it
no miracle drug to be sure but something
akin to a reason to Hope
and because this is fiction where we can
create a world where Poetic Justice
exists prior finds reprieve whether from
the blessings of an actual angel or the
simple remission of a virus that still
baffles researchers to this day
fighting AIDS is about choosing life so
if this is angels in America
why is rent
so much more well known and loved
not only is rent
more well known than angels in America
but more well known than almost any
queer inclusive production it's
remembered as a groundbreaker for
queerness depicted on stage even though
Millennium approaches was hailed as a
masterpiece years before rent appeared
and La Casa fall and torsong Trilogy
were on Broadway even earlier than that
I mentioned earlier but rent has
something that neither angels in America
had big in the ingredients torch song
Trilogy La Casa fall nor even Avenue Q
have rent
is palatable to the exact kind of people
it needs to be Where Angels in America
will go as far to outline that Lewis is
a bit of a smell Queen the queer
components about rent seem edgeless even
though we're dealing with two explicitly
promiscuous characters they seem
particularly inoffensive now perhaps
this is to Larson's credit normalizing
promiscuity however Maureen is more or
less a farcical character she's like
this obliviously unbothered manic pixie
dream girl for whom neither consequences
nor sociological realities apply however
in the case of Mimi and implicitly Angel
at least before their romance with
Collins there's this kind of poetic
justice about it that their lecherous
lifestyle is being cosmically punished
with poverty and poor health meanwhile
Lewis and angels in America remarks his
regretful disbelief in Pryor's AIDS
diagnosis confessing that he screwed
around a lot more than prior did this
was a reality of AIDS somehow people
could screw their way from one orgy to
the next all through the 70s and 80s and
somehow never contract it Elton John
being one case example who has openly
expressed shock that somehow he dodged
that bullet rent doesn't try and build a
fantasy about this but it also doesn't
dive into the reality of it either which
is a statement that could describe why
the play was and is so popular this is
roughly what I mean when I describe it
as palatable reality is difficult to
portray in media and given the
philosophical parameters a fiction may
be impossible to depict however it seems
to be the case and this is mostly
observational backed up by some
scattered tidbits of critical analysis
I've picked up a knob of the years that
people disseminate fiction as if it were
a reality this is why people can be such
sticklers about representation bad
representation sets a precedent for how
certain people are expected to act in
real life and this works both ways too
much positive depiction can set a bar
for Behavior too high for people to
realistically meet leading to unmet
expectations of good behavior the
reality of a given identity usually
contains a narrative history of a press
and while a given identity is not
defined by that oppression their
interactions with the outside world is
going to be colored by this history two
gay people holding hands in a small town
in the evening will passively let go of
each other and put distance between each
other when they hear a camera coming
around the corner
this reaction is unspoken and reflexive
neither individual will hold it against
the other and it's just accepted
hand-holding passively resumes when the
car is gone
this also varies depending upon region
there are nuances depicting these
identities in a way which calls to
attention this narrative history it's
automatically going to
you know challenge the existing
structures of privilege in society and
as we know from experience certain
people are privileged do not like to be
challenged people don't want to feel
like they and their attitudes are
responsible for a condition of suffering
and they certainly don't want to feel
like in order to change the
circumstances of suffering that they
ought to change their own attitudes
people like to feel like they're doing
enough and there's a certain kind of
Shame associated with feeling like
they're part of the problem which for
those of us who have spent
some time on www.twitter.com an all too
common reaction to that shame is denial
and deflection so if a play confronts
the audience with a coded message about
shifting moral values and sentiments
that comes on too strongly General
audiences are less likely to recommend
that play to their friends even if said
play is lauded by theater nerds to be
palatable is to portray these identities
without confronting the elements of
privilege derived from oppression and
this isn't always a bad thing six and
Hamilton both contain an incredibly
diverse cast through the audience being
implored to empathize with these
characters there's an implicit call to
action for the audience to address these
identities in real life as social equals
rather than someone getting up on a
soapbox to talk about oppression at the
audience and in the case of Collins as
an HIV positive man who is still
thinking about manifesting his best life
in the future this is very much the case
in rent Collins also has AIDS while
escaping the aforementioned trap of
poetic justice where there are
consequences to his condition in fact I
can see Collins as a character fitting
into the cast of Angels in America but
rent's palatableness isn't exclusively
linked to gender and sexuality which
even considering my musings about angel
I don't have too much of a problem with
in a practical sense of observing media
I also feel that Mimi's character was
well handled her Arc focused upon her
understanding of no day but today that
coincides with her learning to Value her
own life rather than throwing it away
similar to Prior I can see her learning
to strive for her own life rather than
just giving in to pessimism are the
diverse identities in rent palatable
well yes the play itself doesn't really
explore how the cultural norm inherently
pushes these identities to the fringes
of society where isolated from social
supports they are more vulnerable to
high-risk activities where one is more
likely to be exposed to HIV the script
takes these elements for granted was it
obliged to explore that
would have been nice if it did because
in rent which deals with social themes
there really isn't any call to action
whatsoever okay it sucks to be poor it
sucks to have AIDS
what do we do about it Pryor Belize
Hannah Lewis and Harper have this very
philosophical esoteric call to action
which more or less implores the audience
to accept that change is inevitable you
can die mad about it or accept it and to
be fair Lobo M doesn't really have much
of an answer about it either however as
a tragedy it can more freely moralize
the actions of the characters as a
cautionary tale look at these characters
if you want to avoid tragedy then don't
do what they did changing that ending
for rent there's no real push everything
works out kind of and things are fine
the public is presented with no reality
about what they can do or even what they
need to do
things are fine
it also doesn't help that rents
depiction of poverty and art in general
also follow this pattern art is being
commercialized
okay
what do we do about it rent solution is
let artists make their art but what if
like Maureen's performance art it just
sucks what if like Mark's documentary it
offers nothing to society even Marine
Benny is the only one who calls her out
for only making her performance to boost
her own ego and quite frankly there
isn't a whole lot of textual evidence to
refute that in fact the only character
who expresses any desire to build
community is Benny who is demonized by
the entire cast because he wants his
tenants to pay a reasonable amount of
rent none of the other characters have
any objectives to make art for any other
reason than an intrinsic need to make
something to benefit the self but then
again Benny is an entirely benign
villain which quite frankly is insulting
that the play depicts him as a
tyrannical landlord next to what a lot
of us have had to endure as tenants but
then again a massive portion of the
audience for rent are either homeowners
or the children of homeowners who are
the primary audience of modern Broadway
itself those tickets are expensive to
them shutting off the power is the Apex
of tyranny and rent casually ignores the
fact that legally Benny could have done
a lot worse poverty itself is palatable
it's an inconvenience but it's not the
worst thing in the world these Scrappy
kids are sticking it out aren't they the
reality of poverty and the situation of
living in New York's East Village you
know is Alphabet City is also casually
ignored it was in the early 90s Islam
you shouldn't want to live there it was
an urban center for which survival was
an accomplishment the actual reality of
confronting homelessness in New York
City is more accurately expressed in
angels in America
when you stop that disgusting slurping
he's disgusting slurping feeding animal
feeding yourself what would it matter to
you or to anyone if you just stopped
feeding
and died it is uncomfortable it is
mental illness it is desperation it is
half cohesive confrontation it's the
inability to watch but the impossibility
to look away it is an impossible Welling
of empathy that can only be reconciled
by completely disconnecting emotional
impulse because the force of social
change needed to fix that at an
Institutional level is astronomical it's
not mooing at cops until they go away
we have seen what the police are capable
of to think that mooing at them is going
to fix the problem never mind that the
framing device of rent narrated by Mark
the most privileged of the characters
focuses the story on Roger and Mimi's
relationship and not the cluster of
homeless people fighting for their
ability to exist in a place homeless
confrontation is much more sanitized in
rent reaching a climactic Zenith when
Mark records a homeless woman being
accosted by the police
she accuses Mark of inaction of using
her suffering to benefit him and his
craft which is abundantly true and a
debate that is at the heart of
documentary and ethics and while Mark
feels sad about this at first his queer
friends of color swoop in to more or
less absolve him of all wrongdoing
because hey she just doesn't get your
art the world is going to benefit from
it you got this bro only it won't
because he doesn't seem to have any
Ambitions of showing his art to anybody
else but his group of friends and still
expects to be financially supported for
it however Mark seems to be married to
Pariah Hood cotton this double speak of
wanting to have certain privileges
audiences and beliefs while at the same
time rejecting financial support from
his parents and refusing to do anything
to support the Bohemian Community he is
so attached to it's made clear that he
has a very caring mother who routinely
calls him it's suggested that she is
also willing to help financially support
him however not only does he ignore her
calls he seems to treat her with a
degree of annoyance in fact it's
indicated that many of the cast come
from loving families who seem willing to
take them off the streets and give them
good homes except for Angel and Collins
because queer however that would come at
the cost of their entire artistic
identity being built around roughing it
out in the slums and that's a bridge too
far can't make good art and good homes
at which point rent establishes a very
toxic depiction of poverty itself which
against the textual Mandate of this play
portrays poor people as a people who
refuse jobs and turn down work and B
people who ultimately choose to be poor
meanwhile Mark particularly admittedly
complains about the death of bohemia
because for all Mark likes taking the
center stage and getting all the
attention as a social advocate he
refuses to pay his tab at a local
restaurant you know if you want to keep
Bohemia alive you got to support these
local businesses because they actually
do pay rent
and if they can't pay rent they have to
sell their business which leads to
gentrification but again
as per the palatability of poverty this
is never really discussed question or
mentioned because they're far too
invested in being Pariah as to actually
change anything about their actions it's
okay Mark you don't have to change just
keep doing what you're doing keep
complaining about the right things but
you're under no obligation to do or
change anything
don't worry
you're one of the good ones you're a
straight white man and this is the key
component of moralizing the quality of
palatability in media if this media is
presenting a problem upon whom is the
onus to change
the overarching institutions the public
at Large
in rent like Angel and Collins
absolvement of marks in action against
police brutality there is no suggestion
for those a privileged to change no
lesson there's no indication of how to
change or even to change at all just sit
watch these poor people cry when
something sad happens but ultimately
don't worry they've got magical
Resurrection music they're fine the onus
is on the underclasses to sort out their
business and get it together no change
is required of the wealthy
except maybe to stop wearing Oakleys
put aside artistic intent Integrity
quality of representation scope of
representation politics or our own
conceptions of the literary conventions
at play there is a simple unifying
factor between angels in America and
rent they stand as Symphonies of Hope
amidst the trials and tribulations faced
by people held down by disease addiction
and poverty
in both plays we witnessed the
Relentless pursuit of human Connections
in the face of overwhelming odds the
characters battle societal constraints
discrimination illness and personal
demons yet they refuse to be silenced or
broken in angels in America the AIDS
epidemic looms large threatening the
lives of its characters and casting a
shadow of Despair however it is through
the unlikely bonds between prior and
Hannah that we witness the
transformative Power of Love
and acceptance prior's resilience and
determination to live despite his
illness become a rallying Cry For Hope
conversely rent highlights the
intersection of Art and activism as a
means to confront societal injustices
and Inspire change the characters in
both plays become catalysts symbols
signifiers and advocates for social
progress challenging prevailing norms
and fighting against the forces of
Oppression whether that oppression comes
from capitalistic greed or from the very
Heavenly forces that facilitate our
existence and angels in America the
Angelic presence represents a Divine
call to action
the world only spins forward
there is no going back there is no again
there's only next time we cannot go back
to the days of the past when God sat in
heaven and queer people hidden closets
that's not how the Divine physics of the
world works
a gloomy and painful mood is set upon
the stage in the first section of Angels
in America by kushner's attention to the
political and historical breakdown of
the planet due to reactionary policies
and invocations of environmental and
nuclear calamities the characters
experience a similar predicament as the
story reaches its Midway conclusion
things between Lewis and prior start to
deteriorate Joe's persistent denial of
his homosexuality nearly destroys
Harper's mind and causes the ultimate
crack in their marriage locked in their
isolation their false Notions that it is
necessary or even possible to continue
as they have been
they are at a standstill unable to go
forward with their lives
Harper says I can't move my emotions
serve as a rudder
Pryor and Roy's aids diagnoses mean that
they must like Jacob and the angel
wrestle an impossible and unfair fight
but this is a battle where faith in a
better world is power and Roy is found
wanting alternatively perestroika the
second part of the play which is named
for the Russian word meaning
restructuring is about a glimmer of
optimism and a challenging path out of
the crisis once again politics and
historical ideas shape the protagonists
and antagonists they are gradually
figuring out how to rearrange their
lives this depiction of transformation
which is portrayed as profoundly
unsettling is not a pretty one although
development is portrayed negatively it
is unavoidable Pryor who was picked by
the Heavens to spread calm conservatism
comes to the realization of unavoidable
progress as he resolves to resist giving
in to hopelessness we can't just stop
we're not rocks
progress migration motion is modernity
it's animate it's what living things do
we desire even if all we desire is
stillness it's still desire for
even if we go faster than we should
we can't wait even he knows that change
is inevitable in order to keep up with
the times he contrasts his stance with
that of the Angels who are passively
waiting for God's return and the
restoration of their Realm
instead he rejects the message of a
superior being and places emphasis on
the need for transformation and
development at the individual level
in the epilogue of the play he says this
disease will be the end of many of us
but not nearly all
and the dead will be commemorated
and will struggle on with the living
and we are not going away we won't die
secret deaths anymore
the world only spins forward
so when you see the people demanding we
go back that we regress
who want to spin the world back to a
time when they were comfortable
know that they will simply be left
behind
progress is inevitable sometimes it's
messy and painful
but it will come
because the world only spins forward and
you will be here to see it
promise yourself
that you will be here to see it
you are amazing people each and every
one of you and every day you are blessed
with more life
the time has come
the great work begins foreign
[Music]
foreign
[Applause]
[Music]